Adding documentation for custom function mapping (#2899)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/modeling/custom-function-mapping.md

---
title: User-defined function mapping - EF Core
description: Mapping user-defined functions to database functions
author: maumar
ms.date: 11/23/2020
uid: core/modeling/custom-function-mapping

> ---

Reviewer: Why this page exists?

Author: forgot to remove

RETURNS @blogs TABLE
(
    Rating int,
    Url nvarchar(max),
    PostCount int not null
)
AS
BEGIN
    INSERT INTO @blogs
    SELECT b.Rating, b.Url, COUNT(p.BlogId)
    FROM Blogs AS b
    JOIN Posts AS p ON b.BlogId = p.BlogId
    GROUP BY b.Rating, b.Url
    HAVING COUNT(p.BlogId) > 1

    RETURN
END
```

Now, the `DbSet<BlogWithMultiplePost>` can be mapped to this function in a following way:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#QueryableFunctionConfigurationToFunction)]

> [!NOTE]
> In order to map DbSet to a Table-Valued Function the function must be parameterless. Also, names of the entity properties should match the names of the columns returned by the TVF. Any discrepancies can be configured using `HasColumnName` method, just like mapping to a table.

When the set is mapped to a Table-Valued function, the query:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Program.cs#ToFunctionQuery)]

Produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT [b].[Url], [b].[PostCount]
FROM [dbo].[BlogsWithMultiplePosts]() AS [b]
WHERE [b].[Rating] > 3
```

## Mapping Queryable function to a Table-Valued Function

> EF Core also supports mapping to Table-Valued Function using a user-defined CLR function returning `IQueryable` of entity types. This allows EF Core to use Table-Valued Function with parameters. Process is similar to mapping a scalar user-defined function to a SQL function. We need a Table-Valued function on the database, CLR function that will be used in the LINQ queries and mapping between the two.

Author: "a SQL" or "an SQL"?

Reviewer 2: Not this discussion again :scream: :scream: :scream: :rofl:

---
title: Custom function mapping - EF Core
description: Mapping user-defined functions to database functions
author: maumar
ms.date: 11/23/2020
uid: core/modeling/custom-function-mapping
---

> # Custom function mapping

Reviewer: Should we call this Use defined function mapping?

Reviewer 2: I like user-defined function mapping better, and it probably corresponds to the terminology most users know.

On the downside, there's the part about mapping a CLR method to arbitrary SQL expressions rather than to a database method, so UDF may work less well there.

Reviewer: But custom function mapping is also ambiguous in that case. Functions are more server side thing (client side methods?).

Reviewer: It is like there is no write name without writing a really long title to explain the massive feature we have. :trollface: 
I like the part of user-defined function mapping is that the "function mapping" is defined by user (and also mapping to user-defined function).

Reviewer 2: Whatever we choose will most likely end up a bit ambiguous, at least to someone... We can pick one and go with it...

Author: I think my initial choice was user defined function also, but that was confusing because I associated UDF with the sql function specifically (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/user-defined-functions/create-user-defined-functions-database-engine) and this feature is so much more. Also, custom function mapping was the name in the bug ;) I'm happy to change, don't mind too much

> EF Core allows for using user-defined SQL functions in queries. To do that, the functions need to be mapped to a CLR method during model configuration. When translating the LINQ query to SQL, user-defined function will be called instead of the CLR function it has been mapped to.

Reviewer: "allows for using" did not parse properly in my english.
Also mention that the CLR method can be user defined or something which comes from other library.
Also mention that the function on server side can also be a built-in function rather than use defined function.

## Mapping method to a SQL function

To illustrate the custom function mapping, lets define the following entities:

> [!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Blog.cs#Entity)]

Author: I copied the approach in other sample projects of one class per file. We could move all modest to one file everywhere, but in a separate commit

> [!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Blog.cs#Entity)]

Reviewer: No need to do everywhere but for this specific case we should put together.
I think the classification should be based on what is the focus. If the focus is model classes then separate snippets are fine. But model class is just extra code here.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Post.cs#Entity)]

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Tag.cs#Entity)]

And the following model configuration:

> [!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#EntityConfiguration)]

Reviewer: Do we really need many to many model for this example? I prefer it to be simpler example which works with minimal model configuration for ease of understanding of this particular topic.

Reviewer 2: I had the same thought, just to keep samples as dead-simple as possible.

Author: Ok will Make them comments instead, so 2x 1-many

Blog can have many posts, each post can be tagged with multiple tags, and each tag can be associated with multiple posts: many-to-many relationship.

Next, create the user-defined function `DistinctTagsCountForBlogPosts`, which returns the count of unique tags associated with all the posts of a given blog, based on the blog `Id`:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION dbo.DistinctTagsCountForBlogPosts(@id int)
    RETURNS int
    AS
    BEGIN
        RETURN (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM(
            SELECT DISTINCT t.TagId FROM dbo.Tags AS t
            JOIN dbo.PostTag AS pt ON t.TagId = pt.TagId
            JOIN dbo.Posts AS p ON p.PostId = pt.PostId
            JOIN dbo.Blogs AS b ON b.BlogId = p.BlogId
            WHERE b.BlogId = @id) AS subquery);
    END
```

To use it in EF Core, define the following CLR method, which we will map to the user-defined function:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#BasicFunctionDefinition)]

> In the example, the method is defined on `DbContext`, but it can also be defined in other places.

Reviewer: It has to be static if defined elsewhere. Only on DbContext we use instance method.

> [!NOTE]
> Body of the CLR method is not important. EF Core only looks at the method signature.

This function definition can be associated with user-defined function in the model configuration:

> [!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#BasicFunctionConfiguration)]

Reviewer: Use tabs and also add DbFunctionAttribute based configuration for all facets.

> [!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#BasicFunctionConfiguration)]

Author: Problem with showing OnModelCreating is that there is more stuff in that method that i'm not showing at the moment (and also seeding etc). I could create a dummy OnModelCreating and comment it out with /* */ - thoughts?

> [!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#BasicFunctionConfiguration)]

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't spend too much time on it... Sometimes it's worth having two context types with two OnModelCreating methods so that we can reference separately, in this case it may not be worth it... We can always improve later if we see people get confused.

> [!NOTE]
> By default EF Core tries to map CLR function to a user-defined function with the same name. If the names are different, we can use `HasName` to select the correct name for the user-defined function we want to map to.

Now, executing the following query:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Program.cs#BasicQuery)]

Will produce this SQL:

```sql
SELECT [b].[BlogId], [b].[Rating], [b].[Url]
FROM [Blogs] AS [b]
WHERE [dbo].[DistinctTagsCountForBlogPosts]([b].[BlogId]) > 2
```

> ## Mapping method to function defined in the model

Reviewer: Mapping function to custom SQL. HasTranslation can still be used to map to built-in functions or others.

> EF Core also allows for user-defined functions that don't map to the corresponding function in the database. It can be done by specifying the function body using the [Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Query.SqlExpressions](dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.query.sqlexpressions) API. Function body is provided using `HasTranslation` method during user-defined function configuration.

Reviewer: Incorrect link.

> In the example below, we'll create a function that computes difference between two integers.

Author: The function thing bothered me as well (it's too complicated) but I also didn't want to do something like "addition" because that would be even more meaningless, will try to think of something.

CLR method is as follows:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#HasTranslationFunctionDefinition)]

The function definition is as follows:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#HasTranslationFunctionConfiguration)]

> [SqlExpressionFactory](dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.query.sqlexpressionfactory) can be used to construct `SqlExpression` tree.

Reviewer: Incorrect link.

Also we should discuss with team if we should give guidance to call GetService inside OnModelCreating.

> Once we define the function, it can be used in the query. Instead of calling database function, EF Core will translate the method body directly into SQL.

Reviewer: into SQL based on SQL expression tree constructed from the HasTranslation.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Program.cs#HasTranslationQuery)]

Produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT [p].[PostId], [p].[BlogId], [p].[Content], [p].[Rating], [p].[Title]
FROM [Posts] AS [p]
WHERE [p].[PostId] < ABS([p].[BlogId] - 3)
```

> ## Mapping DbSet to a Table-Valued Function

Reviewer: Move this section under https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/modeling/entity-types as Table-valued function mapping.
And rest of information in this file under query rather than modelling.

> It's also possible to map a `DbSet` of entities to a Table-Valued function instead of a table in the database. To illustrate this lets define another entity that represents blog with multiple posts. In the example, the entity is [keyless](keyless-entity-types), but it doesn't have to be.

Reviewer: incorrect way to reference a link. See https://github.com/dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs/issues/1900

> It's also possible to map a `DbSet` of entities to a Table-Valued function instead of a table in the database. To illustrate this lets define another entity that represents blog with multiple posts. In the example, the entity is [keyless](keyless-entity-types), but it doesn't have to be.

Reviewer: let's

> It's also possible to map a `DbSet` of entities to a Table-Valued function instead of a table in the database. To illustrate this lets define another entity that represents blog with multiple posts. In the example, the entity is [keyless](keyless-entity-types), but it doesn't have to be.

Reviewer 3: We usually talk about mapping an entity type, not a `DbSet`

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION dbo.BlogsWithMultiplePosts()
RETURNS @blogs TABLE
(
    Rating int,
    Url nvarchar(max),
    PostCount int not null
)
AS
BEGIN
    INSERT INTO @blogs
    SELECT b.Rating, b.Url, COUNT(p.BlogId)
    FROM Blogs AS b
    JOIN Posts AS p ON b.BlogId = p.BlogId
    GROUP BY b.Rating, b.Url
    HAVING COUNT(p.BlogId) > 1

    RETURN
END
```

Now, the `DbSet<BlogWithMultiplePost>` can be mapped to this function in a following way:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#QueryableFunctionConfigurationToFunction)]

> [!NOTE]
> In order to map DbSet to a Table-Valued Function the function must be parameterless. Also, names of the entity properties should match the names of the columns returned by the TVF. Any discrepancies can be configured using `HasColumnName` method, just like mapping to a regular table.

When the set is mapped to a Table-Valued function, the query:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Program.cs#ToFunctionQuery)]

Produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT [b].[Url], [b].[PostCount]
FROM [dbo].[BlogsWithMultiplePosts]() AS [b]
WHERE [b].[Rating] > 3
```

> ## Mapping Queryable function to a Table-Valued Function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Mapping a Queryable function to a table-valued Function
```

> EF Core also supports mapping to Table-Valued Function using a user-defined CLR function returning `IQueryable` of entity types. This allows EF Core to use Table-Valued Function with parameters. Process is similar to mapping a scalar user-defined function to a SQL function. We need a Table-Valued function on the database, CLR function that will be used in the LINQ queries and mapping between the two.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EF Core also supports mapping to a table-valued function using a user-defined CLR function returning an `IQueryable` of entity types, allowing EF Core to map TVFs with parameters. The process is similar to mapping a scalar user-defined function to a SQL function: we need a TVF in the database, a CLR function that is used in the LINQ queries, and a mapping between the two.
```

> As an example we'll use a Table-Valued Function that returns all posts marked with a specific tag:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, we'll use a table-valued function that returns all posts marked with a specific tag:
```

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION dbo.PostsTaggedWith(@tag varchar(max))
RETURNS @posts TABLE
(
    PostId int not null,
    BlogId int not null,
    Content nvarchar(max),
    Rating int not null,
    Title nvarchar(max)
)
AS
BEGIN
    INSERT INTO @posts
    SELECT p.PostId, p.BlogId, p.Content, p.Rating, p.Title
    FROM Posts AS p
    WHERE EXISTS (
        SELECT 1
        FROM PostTag AS pt
        INNER JOIN Tags AS t ON pt.TagId = t.TagId
        WHERE (p.PostId = pt.PostId) AND (t.TagId = @tag))

    RETURN
END
```

> CLR function signature is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CLR function signature is as follows:
```

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#QueryableFunctionDefinition)]

And below is the mapping:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/BloggingContext.cs#QueryableFunctionConfigurationHasDbFunction)]

> [!CAUTION]

> > Mapping to queryable of entity types overrides the default mapping to a table for this set. If necessary (for example when the entity is not keyless) mapping to the table must be specified explicitly using `ToTable` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Mapping to an `IQueryable` of entity types overrides the default mapping to a table for the DbSet. If necessary - for example when the entity is not keyless - mapping to the table must be specified explicitly using `ToTable` method.
```

When the function is mapped, the following query:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Modeling/CustomFunctionMapping/Program.cs#TableValuedFunctionQuery)]

> will produce:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Produces:
```
